Oh, before you go, in fact, instead of writing it down, why don't you just tell us your
name so we can edit this week and say so and so sad if we want to?
Okay, I'm Gene Van Troyer and I'm a science fiction writer, as well as a writer of what
is called science fiction poetry.
Right now I also edit a mainstream literary magazine which features among quote unquote
mainstream fiction and poetry, science fiction and science fiction poetry.
Okay, can you just say then a few words about what science fiction poetry is,
some of the classic examples perhaps?
Well, I really can't say what science fiction poetry is in terms of a definition because
no one has ever defined science fiction or poetry. So science fiction poetry has no real
definition but I generally tend to class science fiction poetry as something containing
an element which is usually associated with science fiction. In other words, a speculative
element of outer space or of biology or of time or whatnot. So that's my loose definition.
I think it was pointed out earlier that the epic of Gilgamesh would be nowadays considered to be
fantastic poetry and it's important to realize that what we now are calling science fiction
poetry has been written in the so-called mainstream for a long time. William Blake is a really primary
example of someone who wrote mystical poetry but in order to do it he created alternate worlds
and an ability to travel between this world or the world of London that he knew and his imaginary
England which he called Albion. Well, that's fantasy, that's science fiction, that's alternate world
imagination. In more modern times there's W. H. Auden who has written a number of poems which
would be scientifically oriented as well as science fiction because they speculate about
eventual results of scientific discoveries. One of the most striking examples of what I would
call science fiction poetry is something that was done by Richard Wilbur, a well-established
mainstream poet and this poem is called The Mind Reader. This is a poem about a person who actually
reads minds and he makes his living by reading minds. Now, I don't think Richard Wilbur would call it
science fiction although maybe in the back of his mind he's working with the idea that well this is
usually a science fiction thing but it's really a very well done poem and the point about science
fiction poetry and mainstream poetry is that to be a good poem a science fiction poem must first
be a good poem okay and then content-wise it diverges from what we normally recognize or would
normally class as mainstream poetry. But there would be nothing so much in terms of style that
would differentiate. Any style can be used you can you can use it in very rigidly metered and rhymed
poetic forms which we usually call traditional poetic forms, sestinas, sonnets, villainils
and so forth or it can use the free verse or the modern poetic techniques that you would see
say William Carlos Williams using or Charles Olson using.
Talk about there was one more too I was going to ask and just slip my mind.
Had something to do with Richard Wilbur or W.H.O.D. and the manner?
No not with not with those examples something just about the form it's about poet
science fiction poetry.
The content?
Well I sort of asked that already what you have to do with the content.
Yeah the content would be as I said before the elements which we normally associate with
science fiction or fantasy or speculative writing. Whether it be a spaceship or a time machine or
a scientific discovery. Telephone ghosts as Bob Frazier pointed out earlier.
I think one thing that's important to distinguish also is that science fiction poetry itself
I think represents a refusion of science and poetry up until the last decade as a matter of fact.
It was very vogue-ish very fattish for poets and poetry type people to view poetry and art and science
as mutually exclusive and this is a totally artificial separation because poetic expression
comes from the same wellsprings that the ordering process we see in science comes from.
It's the need to put order on the universe. Well in the Renaissance you didn't see this really
drastic split between science and art. They were viewed as being the same thing.
But I mentioned William Blake earlier and it seems to me that around the time of William Blake
disillusionment with the industrial revolution in science was already setting in and William Blake
is rabidly anti-science and personally I feel that he was mistaken in this particular aspect but
he looked around the world that he saw and things were terrible. People were enslaved almost by the
industrial system and he was just rabidly opposed to it because it oppressed the spirit. It oppressed
the soul. Well now I think this is a forerunner of the split that gradually grew from about the
19th or the latter part of the 18th century up until the present time in the 20th century
but it's gradually coming back together and you see a lot more science showing up in poetry and
poets feeling much more confident about expressing things out of science in their poetry as well as
scientists falling back on poetry to explicate things. Good okay I thought I wanted just two
more brief ones. Would you say that most of the science fiction poetry being written today was in
more narrative or more lyrically lyric and personal? A lot of the science fiction poetry that
I've seen in science fiction magazines that I've looked at that have been published over the last
50 years tends to be in a narrative form. A lot of poets and a lot of people who read poetry in
science fiction identify poetry as just another form of poetry or another form of storytelling I
should say and so a lot of it will be a narrative or in a narrative framework but it doesn't have to
be in a narrative framework to be a science fiction poem and a lot of people especially
well myself or Bob Frazier or other people who are in the SFPA or who are not in the SFPA are
trying to use other forms modern forms lyrical forms free verse and so forth as a means of
science fiction poetic expression. Okay just one more can you think just to maybe rehash or add
something to what Bob Frazier said about some titles either anthologies individual poems books
that people might go to if they want to read something? Well one the one collection of poems
that comes to mind would be Richard Wilbur's mind reader and other poems. We see a lot of fantasy
stuff in Richard Wilbur's work then he pointed out to Edward Lucy Smith's Holding Your Eight Hands
there's also John Fairfax's Frontiers of Going which is a British book and contains primarily
British writers but it's all space poetry as John Fairfax calls it and then what was what was the
inside outer space by Vastai?
Robert Vastai's yeah that would be that and then there was a book edited by Richard what was his
name? Grossinger. Grossinger it was called EO and it was a series of poems that were subtitled
a science fiction vision of Mars. No it was a series of small press books. Just a series of small
press books. Okay a series of small press books called EO on themes that were primarily fantastic
science fictional and whatnot. Well it's been around for quite a while it's only been in really in
recent years that the term science fiction poetry came into usage I think about 1974 was when the
term was first used and it was coined by well it wasn't coined by anybody but it was just used as a
label by Peter Dillingham who was a nearly a prosodist and theorist of science fiction poetry
and Stephen Gregg who edited Eternity Science Fiction which was the first science fiction magazine
to really incorporate poetry as an integral part of its format. That's fine with me is anybody
Bill or David want to ask anything? That's fine. Okay thank you very much. Thank you listen
did you leave the information?